---
**CS1020 Introduction to Programming**

Learning Objectives:

No prior programming experience is assumed. The main objective is to
develop the skill to solve simple computational problems by designing
step by step logical solutions and converting them to computer programs.
Standard programming constructs like conditional execution, iteration,
arrays and functions will be introduced. Basics of organization of a
computing unit and computer representation of numbers will also be
covered. Towards the last part of the course students will be introduced
to data abstraction. This course will provide students with sufficient
coding skills for any course with a programming component like
Programming and Data Structures, Computational methods and CAD
Laboratory.

Learning Outcomes:

By the end of the course, students will be able to design and code
simple moderate sized (100 to 200 lines) programs for solving simple
computational tasks. Students will also be able to understand and debug
moderate sized programs written by others. Through the lab exercises,
students will be able to write modular and maintainable programs,
following one of the standard coding conventions.

Syllabus:

Basic organization of a computer: ALU, input-output units, memory,
program counter - variables and addresses - instructions: store,
arithmetic, input and output, different data types and their computer
epresentation, ranges and overflow,

Simple sequential programs, conditional instruction: if then else,
control flow diagrams, nested conditions, Iterations: while loop and its
control fow,

Arrays indexing, memory model, programs with array of integers, two
dimensional arrays, variants of conditional and iterative instructions

Functions, modularity, declaration and definition, function call and
return and associated control flow, functions with parameters, returning
a value, multiple parameters, data flow during function call, modifying
parameters inside functions using pointers, arrays as parameters.

User-defined data types, pointers, dereferencing and address operators,
pointer and address arithmetic, array manipulation using pointers.

C programming language will be used for instruction.

Textbook(s)

1.  The C Programming Language by Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M.
    Ritchie (2nd Edition, 1988), Prentice Hall (ISBN:978-0131103627)
2.  Schaum\'s Outline of Programming with C by Byron S Gottfried (1996),
    McGraw-Hill Education (ISBN:978-0070240353)



