---
**CS2020 Discrete Mathematics for Computer Science**

Learning Objectives: The objective of this course is to cover some of
the topics that lie at the foundation of many areas of Computer Science
and Engineering. Areas like Algorithm Design and Analysis, Operating
Systems, Compilers, Databases and Networks make extensive use of
counting techniques and graph theory \-- the major topics covered in
this course.

Learning Outcomes: The student should be able to identify a variety of
problems studied in computer science as questions about graphs, partial
orders or other discrete structures. The student should be able to apply
the techniques learned here to analyse such questions.

Syllabus:

Basic counting. Counting functions, subsets and permutations. Estimation
of factorials and binomial coeﬃcients. Lower bound for sorting
algorithms.

Combinatorial Principles. Inclusion--exclusion principle, Bijective
proof, Double counting, Pigeonhole principle, Method of distinguished
element, Twelvefold way. Lower bound for merging algorithms.

Graphs. Graphs as models of interaction. Graph isomorphism, subgraphs,
subgraph isomorphism. Degree sequences, Havel--Hakimi algorithm.
Eulerian graphs and Eulerian digraphs. Hamiltonian cycles and Dirac\'s
Theorem. Computational complexity of these problems (without proofs).
Triangle-free graphs and Mantel's theorem.

Bipartite graphs. Characterization Of Bipartite Graphs.
Matchings,Hall\'s Marriage Theorem, Kőnig's theorem. Edge-colouring of
bipartite graphs.

Planar graphs. Euler's formula. Vertex colouring of planar graphs, Six
colour theorem and Five colour theorem.

Orderings. Partial orders and Hasse diagram. Lattices. Linear extension,
chains and antichains. Scheduling. Mirsky's theorem and Erdős--Szekeres
theorem.

Generating Functions. Combinatorial Applications Of Polynomials.
Sequences Generating functions. Fibonacci and Catalan numbers. Integer
partitions

Probabilistic Methods. Proofs by counting. Finite probability spaces and
random variables over them. Basic probabilistic method and method of
expectation. Coupon collector problem. Birthday paradox. \[6 lectures\]

Textbook

1.  Invitation to Discrete Mathematics by Jiří Matoušek and Jaroslav
    Nešetřil (2nd Edition) Oxford University Press (ISBN-13:
    978-0198570424)

Reference

1.  Discrete Mathematics by Norman L. Biggs (2nd Edition, 2002), Oxford
    University Press (ISBN- 13: 978-0198507178)
2.  Discrete Mathematics and Applications by Kenneth Rosen (7th Edition,
    2012), McGrawHill Education (ISBN-13: 978-0073383095)

