---
title: Computer Networks
code: CS3200
category: PMT
credits: 3-0-0-3
---

> The Internet, like the steam engine, is a technological breakthrough
> that changed the world.  -- Peter Singer

One of the most important aspects of modern world is the internet --
the collection of uncoordinated heterogeneous devices be it computers,
phones and other gadgets that exchange data and perform
computations. Almost every aspects of modern life is touched by this
invention. In this course, we study various aspects like protocols,
standards, software etc that make such a huge collection devices work
together and achieve various computational tasks.

# Learning outcomes

At the end of this course we expect the student to know the details of
various protocols, networking technologies and basics of network
security.

# Syllabus

Goals of networking, well-known applications such as web, e-mail and
ftp, need for a layered architecture, OSI and Internet. Host-to-host
communication: packet switching; reliable transmission -
stop-and-wait, sliding window; logical connections. Multiple
co-located hosts: addressing, LAN access methods; CSMA/CD, Ethernet,
Token passing, wireless LANs; Simple performance models; WAN access
methods - PPP. Remotely located hosts: addressing, interconnection of
LANs; repeaters, bridges, routers; ATM cell-switching IP: routing
protocols (RIP and OSPF); congestion control concepts and mechanisms
(choke packets, leaky bucket); IPv4 End-to-end reliability: the
end-to-end argument; protocols - TCP, UDP, RPC; connection
establishment, flow control. Applications protocols for email, ftp,
web, DNS.

Basics of network security, symmetric and asymmetric key cryptography,
key exchange, digital signatures. Some security related protocols,
ssh, tls etc.

# Textbooks

1. Computer Networks, Andrew S. Tanenbaum and David J Wetherall, 5th
   Edition.  Pearson publication.

2. Computer Networking: A Top-Down Approach Featuring the Internet,
   James F Kurose and Keith W Ross. Pearson publication.
