---
**CS4010 Computer Networks**

Learning Objectives: One of the most important aspects of the modern
world is the internet \-- the collection of uncoordinated heterogeneous
devices be it computers, phones and other gadgets that exchange data and
perform computations. Almost every aspects of modern life is touched by
this invention. In this course, we study various aspects like protocols,
standards, software etc that make such huge collection devices work
together and achieve various computational tasks.

Learning Outcomes: At the end of this course we expect the student to
know the details of various protocols, networking technologies and
basics of network security.

Syllabus:

Protocols, packet switching and circuit switching, delays in packet
switching, layered architecture, protocol layering and encapsulation,
theoretical basis for data communication, line codes, multiplexing

Link layer services, flow control, error detection and correction,
Hamming codes, convolution codes, Reed-Solomon code, error detecting
codes, improving parity check, checksum, cyclic redundancy check (CRC),
simple link layer protocols, multiple access protocols, collision
resolution protocols, wireless LAN protocols

Overview of network layer, IPV4 datagram, fragmentation, addressing,
DHCP, NAT, IPv4 to IPv6, routing algorithms, the optimality principle,
shortest path algorithm, Dijkstra's algorithm, flooding, distance vector
routing, the count to infinity problem, various types of routing
mechanisms, congestion control and techniques to solve it, QoS, traffic
shaping, packet scheduling algorithms, ICMP, APR, DHCP, label switching,
MPLS, OSPF -- an interior gateway protocol, BGP -- an exterior gateway
protocol

Transport layer and its services, Berkeley sockets, addressing and
protocol details, the two-army problem, efficiency and power, max-min
fairness, AIMD, UDP, TCP sliding window, delayed ack and Nagle's
algorithm, silly window syndrome, Clark's algorithm, TCP timer
management, computing and estimating RTO

DNS, domain resource records, name servers, address resolution, e-mail,
SMPT, WWW, cookies, web tracking, HTTP, HTTP caching, streaming audio
and video, audio compression, perceptual encoding, frequency masking,
content delivery, Zip's law, server farms, web proxy, CDNs, DNS
redirection, BitTorrent

Network security, cryptography, cryptanalysis, substitution ciphers,
transposition ciphers, symmetric-key algorithms, P-box and S-box, DES,
triple DES, AES, other ciphers, cryptanalysis, public-key algorithms,
RSA, digital signatures, symmetric key signatures, public key
signatures, message digest, authentication protocols, shared key based
authentication, reflection attack, Diffe-Hellman key exchange,
authentication using public key cryptography

Textbooks

1.  "Computer Networks", Andrew S. Tanenbaum and David J Wetherall, 5th
    Edition. Pearson publication.

References\

1.  "Computer Networking: A Top-Down Approach Featuring the Internet",
    James F Kurose and Keith W Ross, 7th edition, Pearson
2.  "Data Communication and Networking", Behrouz A. Forouzan and Sophia
    Chung Fegan,, Huga Media, 2007.

